was such that it only met next year's requirement for officers.
It didn't look at National Guard and Reserve requirements.
Where the Army over here was expanding their Guard and Reserve components considerably, and they had a program where you could actually end up commissioning and going into the Guard or Reserve.
So it wasn't just an active duty program.
But that allowed the Army to commission more than
Their fair share, I would say.
But the Army program grew.
I think the leadership we had in the Army program took advantage of some of the options, and the Army program did grow.
What about the Navy and Marine program?
The Navy and Marine program?
I don't recall...
any real significant change in the size of that program.
It was the smaller of the three, and I would say today it's still the smaller of the three programs here.
If we were to poll the Corps members during those years, would there have been, other than their own service, would there have been one that they would have thought was the best and one that was the weakest?
if we had had a poll?
I'm not sure how that poll would have come out.
I think, General, one thing that helped the Army program, they tended to focus more on the challenge and rigor of the program.
The Air Force program was seen a little soft, I think.
The other students
The Army and the Navy Marine students would say, you know, the Air Force guys, they don't do as many push-ups as we do and they don't run as far.
It's not as challenging from that standpoint.
But what I saw during my time here, it became, I think, more focused.
It was this idea of challenge and rigor and running and physical fitness.
All of those became...
Factors it would cost people to select a certain program I remember one case There's one family.
I believe they were from up around temple and they had several sons that were in the Aggie band in succession there and They were Air Force cadets here and The mother stopped me one time I think when one of her sons was coming as a freshman and
And she wrote me a letter later to this effect that she wished, you know, all the people could participate in those kind of weekend bivouac kind of activities that the Army students do, where they go out there and repel and paint their faces and do all this stuff.
She said, why doesn't the Air Force program do that?
You know, it'd be more interesting and challenging if they did that.
Well, I tried to explain that.
I try to explain my answer to her, but it really comes down to the mission of the service.
The Army's mission is to put people with rifles out on the battlefield and, you know, they do repel and they crawl under fences and they do all these things.
They paint their faces up.
In the Air Force, the offensive part is primarily airplanes.
and pilots and navigators and so forth flying those airplanes.
Enlisted folks are back at the home base maintaining these airplanes.
It's a different mission.
So there's no reason for the Air Force to teach repelling and all these things.
But she clearly saw what the Army did is more fun for a cadet than what the Air Force guys did.
But the Army capitalized on that feeling and was able to build up their program.
During all of your years here as a Commandant, what were the realities of co-education in the Corps, the women?
Now when you got back, the band had already been, were women already in the band?
Right.
So that had already been done.
Were there any significant events during your years of where women began to move up in status and rank and responsibility in the Corps?
I believe that is the case, although it's not in great numbers.
I think I've talked in past sessions about the numbers of women has increased
some over the years, and we did start an integration program back in the late 80s, about 89, 90s when we started that.
And we did stress the idea that women were invited and encouraged to be in all organizations.
We did have women in Parsons Mounted Cavalry, Ross Volunteers,
A good many in the band.
The band, I saw a marked increase in the number of women.
The band was very accepting of women.
Women did very well in the band.
They had, these kids had worked with women in high school bands and all.
There was just something there that made it more achievable in the band.
I was disappointed that, say in the Ross Volunteers and the Parsons Mounted Cav, we
stayed pretty much at the token level.
There seemed to be a barrier there that we couldn't really get beyond one or two.
By what method are you at liberty to speak about this?
What is the selection process for members of Ross Volunteers?
Well, there's written things that they should represent.
I think adjectival kind of qualifications that they should
meet but it's essentially the best of the best and but it's the student vote the students in the rvs those who are members of the rvs will get to vote next year and i believe it's just over 70 72 i guess it is new members each year and those students vote
and they do that pretty much by themselves there's an advisor there that monitors that as I recall monitors the voting but it's a pretty set way to select them and I think generally they do select
the right people, but there could be differences of opinion there about who should get in and who shouldn't.
Had there been women, before you came back as Commandant, had there been women in the RVs?
There was no.
There may have been, but I can't remember
There was no standout pioneer first female.
We did have one the year before I came.
Her name was Mandy, Amanda Schubert.
She was the deputy corps commander.
And that was held up as a real mark of achievement for women.
The first time.
What year would that have been?
I would have been in 86, I believe.
Or 87, 86, 87.
But she was the deputy corps commander.
and had established quite a mark for women in the Corps.
I remember that.
I met her.
And also in the RVs.
And I can't say for sure, but I think perhaps she was in the RVs.
I don't recall that for sure, but that was the year before I came.
Describe, if you would, for this machine how Corps commanders and other key Corps leaders are selected.
When I came here, it was explained to me how it had been done before, and we followed that with some adjustments to it.
At that point in time, the Corps had a sergeant major, a junior, who was designated as the Corps Sergeant Major.
That junior was looked to as the leader of the junior class and the heir apparent to the Corps commander position.
But we had a selection board, and early in February or so, we would have a selection board.
I would chair that selection board, and I'd have ROTC representatives there, female representative on my staff, other top people.
We didn't have cadets on that in the first years, but it was a group of about eight or ten cross-section of staff, ROTC, and we would do interviews.
The students could apply for it if they wanted to be corps commander.
They could be nominated for it by some cadet, but we would take those and
In those first years, it just worked out.
There was a manageable number that we could interview.
But then we would hold interviews.
Usually talk to them at least 30 minutes or longer during the interview.
And we'd have a table set up and bring the individual in.
And they'd walk in, salute, and sit down.
And I would set the tone for the meeting and the questioning.
We'd rotate to ask questions and see how they responded.
We asked them all kind of questions we thought were appropriate, like, you know, what their style of leadership is and what would they do about certain things, you know, what's your feeling about this and that.
Times we even asked, you know, what's your feeling about women in the Corps.
All of these kind of questions were considered.
And after we'd interviewed all the candidates, and usually it was maybe 10 candidates that had come to this point, we would call the corps commander in of that senior class and sit him down, it was a him in every case, and say,
You know, of your impressions of these people, you've worked with them, some of them have been on your staff, but what's your evaluation of these candidates?
I want the corps commander to have a firm input, a student input.
And I think with every case that I was there, with one exception, it was an easy pick.
There was a unanimous, there didn't seem to be any question about who it should be.
The one exception was, I'm getting off track a little bit here, but anyway, this process would be concluded, and we would take a vote, and like I say, in every case except one, it was essentially unanimous from the first.
It was obvious the leader stood out so well.
And more often than not, it was the sergeant major.
In earlier years it was, but I should finish that part.
Some of the students came to me and said, you know, we're really selecting the sergeant major to end of the sophomore year.
That really means we're selecting a corps commander to end of the sophomore year if it's just kind of an automatic thing that this one's going to fly up all the way.
And we accepted that point and decided that we would not have a core sergeant major, that we would have a rotating one.
We'd have the juniors on the staff rotate for six weeks, say, one would be the sergeant major and then another one to give them opportunity to train and learn and experience in this position.
That seemed to work fine too.
But the idea was no one should feel they've got a lock on this job.
We want the best qualified person.
And sometimes you learn more of the junior year or they may disappoint you a little bit, but on the other hand, usually you could pick the number one person even back then.
I don't remember any year that I didn't think we selected really an outstanding person for this position.
The one exception where it didn't seem so clear, we had a student,
that was in the band, and I don't believe anyone had ever been selected to be corps commander out of the band.
They were separate down there, they had their drills and practices, and it was just kinda taken for granted.
A bandsman just out of the running.
Maybe the band student hasn't had the breadth of the experience that he needed, or she needed, but this one student kinda stood out to us, and he seemed very
much a leader, someone who had a grasp and pulse for everything.
And that was kind of a split vote.
And I asked to cast the deciding vote.
And there were a few rankled feathers over that one that maybe I'd, you know, selected the wrong one.
But that was the only time I got put in that position.
But the student turned out to be very good and outstanding, one of the best young men I've ever been associated with.
And they proved that one could come out of the band and be the corps commander.
And I was glad to see that after that all happened.
In hindsight, the people selected as corps commander, were they more likely to be Air Force, Army, or Navy, Marine?
Or was there a pretty good variety?
It was pretty much between the Army and the Air Force, I would say, most years.
However, we did have one out of the Navy program.
I can think of at least one, perhaps more than that, but no one service had a lock on that.
The Army program, their summer camp program, I had an opportunity to visit up at Fort Lewis, Washington, and I thought an outstanding program did a good job of giving the Army contract cadets an extra leg on leadership and leadership training.
But the Army program became bigger over time, so, you know, there were more students there.
One conflict we had was whether you had to be under contract to be corps commander.
You know, this, in old days, it was just, that's the way it was.
I mean, they, mostly everyone under contract, and so a contract cadet would be the corps commander.
You know, he would be commissioned and go into one of the services.
But as we had more DNC students and more pressure, more concern about doing something for them and treating them fairly, giving them a fair break on this, at one point I think a lot of them felt they didn't have a chance for any real high leadership position in the Corps, especially Corps commanders.
So we had to kind of reinforce the idea that
anyone can be court commander.
It's the best qualified.
That's the simplest rule I could tell them.
We want the best qualified person for this job.
Now it's our job to figure that out.
But we're not going to put any restrictions on who can
be the corps commander.
How did you inform the new corps commander designate that he had been selected?
Called them into the office, called all the candidates in together.
I remember them standing up and I think I still have a picture or two of this, but they'd be standing up in front of my office and I would compliment all of them and
make a little speech there about how well they had performed and how any of them could have done the job.
But after considering all, we'd selected so-and-so first to be the deputy corps commander.
We went through the same, generally it was the same candidates.
One would be named commander and one the deputy commander.
And I would announce those candidates.
And then we implemented the procedure a little later on and we'd meet down at the corps center and have a
formal presentation of them before, friends and family and cohort.
It was kind of a formal announcement of this.
One thing we always did when I came here, General Simpson told me about, you know, we usually let the president officially name the commandant and deputy commandant.
That had been a practice for a long time.
And I thought that was quite appropriate.
And so we'd always withhold full public disclosure until we had informed the president.
And usually the president, at least he did in my days, would arrange a meeting and take the two over and sit down with the president.
And, you know, he'd go through comments and congratulations, and we'd get photos.
I think it added a lot of prestige to it.
But I say I made the final decision or approval.
Really, it was the president.
I never considered myself the final stop on that.
As far as you knew then, what kind of celebration did the selectees have that night?
Was there any ritual?
I don't, you know, I wasn't privy to any ritual other than
they make an announcement or they would make an announcement in Duncan Dining Center to the whole Corps that this had happened and that always created some some hooping and hollering there and generally it was all very positive but you know if there was some ritual beyond that I wasn't in on that now during those years that you were commandant there were no minority
race minority problems, were there?
Things went rather smoothly in that area, didn't they?
That's right.
I don't recall any major racial problems that we had in the Corps.
I remember one or two small complaints that people had, but you know, as far as a big racial problem,
like happening across the country or had in years past or even in the military.
You know, we had our share of racial problems some years back.
But generally, cadets were accepting of other races.
As long as you would do your part, put out your best effort, the Corps has always been quite willing to accept people of any race.
Like I tell people, as far as I know, in
as A&M opened up to women and to other races, the black students had an easier time here as pioneers than the women did.
I would agree.
Let's see, other major decisions that the commandant had to make, corps commander and things like that, what are some other major decisions that you had to make every year?
Well, a lot of individual cases, disciplinary cases.
Don't give me an example.
What was the sorts of things that these might involve?
They could involve hazing, harassment, abuse, those kind of things.
Drugs?
Drugs.
I only remember one or two drug problems in my years.
I always felt comfortable.
that we did not have a major drug problem in the Corps.
What about drinking?
Drinking was a significant problem, one that concerned me all my years.
I was never satisfied with our statuses regarding alcohol.
What were they primarily drinking?
Was it beer or whiskey?
I'd say beer probably more than... That's what I would have guessed.
Mostly.
But it seemed like most of our problems some way, major problems, not always, but frequently related to alcohol.
What were some of the goofiest situations you had to deal with?
Well, I mentioned one or two of those haul-off cases where they haul a commander off one to Fort Stockton, Texas at an airplane, one to Mount Rushmore in South Dakota.
I remember one case that made the newspaper here and it was I think in the same season that they did the haul offs and this one guy had been captured by his freshman and I think they had shaved his growing area and put the heel and sole
That was a favorite trick, to put heel and sole on people, where they shaved them and stuff like that.
And they had this guy, and they were making all these pictures of him.
One kid had made a whole roll or more.
And he takes them down here to the drugstore somewhere to get them developed.
thinking, boy, you know, we're going to have some gems out of this.
And the people that developed the photos see this, and it looks like this guy is bound and gagged or something, and it looks like a criminal thing to them.
And they notify the authorities that a crime may have been presented.
they didn't know what it was all about but this guy being tied and hand some handcuffs on him and all this but they turned it in and you know it ends up out here and bob white gets it and you know it turns out it's the clue to this hazing incident you know they label it hazing and that was an interesting case it was it was a prank it was
kind of innocent in my opinion, but you could look at it another way as something very serious.
But these guys got surprised their life when their photos were confiscated and they were hauled up on charges of, I don't remember what they were exactly.
How often did your phone ring in the middle of the night?
It's not unusual for my phone to ring.
But once a week or?
Oh, at least.
Everything from major incidents.
We had a lot of cases of students passing out from running or sometimes apprehension and all plus running and heat and things like that could cause them to pass out and they're taken to the health center, sometimes off campus.
Lots of those kind of calls off and on.
Normally, who was it that called you with those serious matters?
An appropriate, responsible person.
Right.
Colonel Lee McCleskey was brought on not always after I started over there, sometime after, but he became the training discipline officer after about three or four years I'd been over there.
But he became a man in between me and all the stuff that's happening down there in my earlier years, you know.
I frequently got it called from the guard room.
Did members of the Corps, did students ever call you?
Yes.
Is that right?
Yes, they did.
The Corps commanders a lot of time were very good about calling me about incidents.
No, but I'm talking about some student calling you as a prank.
I can't think of anything that was doing a prank on me.
I can't think of anything like that, that they did a prank on me, not really.
Because I would have thought that would have been a big deal to wake up the commandant or something like that.
Well, I had a lot of phone calls that, you know, somebody would just be breathing or talking or saying something crazy.
I never knew who those people were.
But I used to get those calls all the time, unidentified people now.
That may have been cadets, I don't know.
I had one call that related to a death that...
that I remember quite well.
We had the big military weekend with the visiting students and had a big ball over in the, a big dinner over in Duncan and a ball after it right there.
And I remember after the speech, we stood around there a while and walked over to the area where they were dancing and
We didn't stay there long, and my wife and I were headed home, and I got this call that we had a student that was being transported to the hospital that he passed out in his room and said he had an asthma attack.
He was at this event we just attended, a freshman.
And I thought, well, that can't be too serious, an asthma attack.
But by the time I got home, I got a call that he'd died.
But he was allergic to pecans.
And he knew that.
And we had carrot cake that night for dessert.
That's dinner we had.
And apparently he'd had a little bit of pecan.
And he had this choking and all.
And he couldn't get his medicine soon enough.
Very tragic thing.
Oh, I didn't know that.
Very good kid.
I didn't know that was ever that severe.
My, my.
He passed away, you know, before I could believe it.
And when I first heard asthma, I thought, well, you know, I never dreamed it would be a life-threatening situation.
But I've had, you know, that extreme, but lots of cases where people are hurt.
I think I told you about the family.
I've had three or four major incidents in Parsons Mounted Cavalry where students were seriously injured.
and their life hang in the balance.
Those are of course the worst kind of calls but a lot of calls that just involve little stuff.
Now we didn't have any Corps members attempt to kidnap Bevo or any other mascots during your years was there?
Well I don't know that they tried to kidnap Bevo but they did a lot of other
pranks you know from painting up campuses to stealing letters off the bailer on the bailer sign on front we had students captured over at austin that seemed to be every year something like that happened and i don't know how much went on that didn't get caught you just know the things that
that get reported, but had numerous cases of, mostly in Austin, some at Baylor.
Those are the only ones that.
In the 10 years you were coming up?
Nine.
Nine years.
Who were some of the key support people, like Bob Wyatt, General Simpson, who were those folks at?
John Colas, of course, was my boss.
Howard Perry.
Howard was a very close friend and gave me lots of good advice and all.
Howard was, you know, kind of ran
one aspect of student services there.
He ran the budget and all of that.
But Howard was a wise fellow, had been here a long time, knew a lot of people.
But he was a good friend and a good supporter.
General Simpson.
What was his official task?
When I came here, he had retired and he was a mentor.
Okay.
He would
Students could come and visit with him.
You know, he'd hold office so many hours a week.
I think he'd come in the afternoons maybe three times a week or something like that, and students could come in and visit with him.
But, you know, when I came here, I'm not sure General Simpson supported my coming or selection.
You know, I didn't know him.
I didn't really know him.
And my first meeting with or two with him, we...
You know, he kind of laid out some of the problems and kind of gave me a charge and like, you're a new fellow here, guy.
I don't know you, but you know you got your work cut out.
And he kind of set things out for me there.
But it was, as he offered to be helpful and opportunity for me to come visit with him and wanted me to,
And we got those contacts going, and he became really one of my strongest allies and friends here.
His task had been officially what?
Head of the School of Military Sciences.
And that's an interesting subject I don't think we've had much chance you might want to pursue, but I had this dual title of Commandant and Head of the School of Military Sciences.
Describe that.
It was not well explained to me when I came here, but they said General Simpson had occupied this...
of head of the School of Military Sciences for a few years there.
I guess it was under Dr. Williams.
I'm not sure who first brought him on board.
I believe he was, but the Corps was having a lot of problems.
General Simpson mentioned to me.
He had retired and was living in Bryan, and Jack Williams, I believe he was,
that knew him and said, hey, why don't you come out and help us with the Corps.
And that all worked out that General Simpson became the head of the School of Military Sciences.
I could look back in the files and I could see some of the correspondence that used to go from the Commandant up to General Simpson.
And they looked to him for a lot of guidance, a lot of direction.
He gave direction, too.
It wasn't just merely mentoring suggestions.